Number 11 and we've been studying through the book of Hebrews here on Sunday mornings and of course our theme for
2020 looking unto Jesus. I'm thankful that he is the author and he is the finisher of our faith
Amen, and what a wonderful blessing. We've been called to run a race and as we run our race, we've been
Instructed to keep our eyes upon the Lord Jesus Christ and what a blessing I've often said throughout this year
of course many things that have occurred that none of us could have ever expected or
Anticipated but we've often said that we can have the peace of God which passeth all understanding
we can have joy and hope and
All of those wonderful things why not because we have our head in the sand
But because we have our eyes on our Savior, amen, and we serve a great God
He is the Lord God omnipotent and he does reign
Amen and we had the opportunity yesterday to do a little kayaking and what a joy to see the beauty of God's creation and
Just to be able to just sit in amazement of his handiwork. Amen, and what a blessing
We're so thankful for all that God has done for us. We begin our journey this morning through Hebrews chapter 11
I believe that we could spend months going through this particular chapter
We don't have months to go through Hebrews chapter 11 if we're going to finish in
2020 my plan is to preach five messages from this passage of scripture from Hebrews 11
I will not say over the next five weeks because next week is revival meeting
I will not be preaching from the book of Hebrews, but we will be having a special message next Sunday morning
and so for five messages
I plan to go through the book or the
11th chapter here of the book of Hebrews and if we're able to do that
It should keep us on schedule for being able to can complete the book of Hebrews here in
2020 it is interesting as we begin chapter number 11. The Bible says now faith is
the substance of things hoped for the evidence of things not seen
For by it the elders obtained a good report through faith. We
Understand that the worlds were framed by the Word of God
So that things which are seen were not made of things which do appear
If we look at these first three verses of Hebrews 11
I'm going to title the message now faith is just from verse number one there
And it's interesting as we studied through the 10th chapter over the last several weeks
We understood that in Hebrews 10 in verse number 22 that the recipients were instructed to let us draw near
With a true heart remember this in full assurance of faith
Later in the chapter. They were instructed in verse number
37 excuse me 38 now the just shall live by faith
and then it's interesting as we end the
Chapter the 10th chapter and you come to the latter part of verse number 39
It says but we are of them that believe to the saving of the soul
We're not of them who draw back unto perdition
but we're of them that believe to the saving of the soul and then the writer says now faith is
And he's going to give us this great description of what faith is. And of course we understand
The content of Hebrews chapter 11 if you've been around the Lord's work for any length of time
you've had an understanding many throughout the years have referred to Hebrews 11 as the hall of faith chapter and
Throughout the chapter. We have the opportunity to see how that
Those that have gone on before us by faith what they did
It's interesting. I believe that the subject matter of faith is a fascinating study
In fact as you study throughout the Word of God and you study
Various aspects of faith and those that exercise faith
and of course
Even as you consider the life and ministry of the Lord Jesus Christ and how so often as he would interact not only with his
Disciples but others in whom he had the opportunity to minister to during his earthly ministry
You find that he often refers to the subject matter of faith and we find that it is a fascinating study
We know there are many that have lived and gone before us those in the scriptures that we could read of but even others
That would be our contemporaries if you will that we would say they they lived by faith. They had great faith
They believed God
One of those men that some of you may be familiar with is. Dr. Lee Robertson
he is with the Lord now and the Lord used brother Robertson in a great way and
He had the opportunity to start a church and start a Bible College and
Many people were trained for the ministry people that were scattered all throughout the world
serving God in various capacities and they had
10,000 members in their church
they had satellite churches all across the area in Tennessee in which they
Had their church and when brother Robertson was in his 90s nearing the end of his journey here upon earth
He had the opportunity to have some conversation with Clarence Sexton
Clarence Sexton also pastors down in Tennessee
he is still alive today and pastoring the Temple Baptist Church in Powell, Tennessee and
He asked dr. Robertson this question. He said if there was one thing that you could go back and change
what would it be and
This man that had exercised great faith in God throughout his life and ministry said this to have more faith
In God to have more faith in God
It is interesting for the disciples when they were there with the Lord Jesus Christ and receiving instruction
We find it in Luke 17 in verse number 5. They say to the Lord Jesus Christ. They say increase our faith
We understand the Bible tells us in Romans 10 in verse number 17
So then faith cometh by hearing and hearing by the Word of God
And we understand even as we concluded last week that we have a
Responsibility as the people of God to live by faith that reference that we found at the end of Hebrews chapter number 10
That is contained not only here in the book of Hebrews
But we find also in the book of Romans in the book of Galatians that quote from the prophet Habakkuk
The just shall live by faith
And we understand the importance of this subject matter
And as we begin looking at this 11th chapter these first three verses give us a good foundation
To have a proper understanding of all that will be discussed in this chapter notice with me if you're taking notes first of all faith
explained
Faith explained now there are some in our world today that have a misunderstanding of what faith is
Not only are there some in our world today that have a misunderstanding of what faith is
But I believe there are some even of the household of faith that have a misunderstanding of what faith is
and so we find that here in the scriptures that God is giving us and the people that have just been instructed these
Recipients that have been told how superior our God is and how Christ is better than the angels. He's better than the prophets
He's better than Moses. He's better than Abraham
He's better than the the the Levitical the Aaronic priesthood and he's so much greater
He's far superior and then they're told to live by faith and then faith is explained to them
even before we see the
Expression of faith through all of those that would be referenced in Hebrews chapter 11
By the way, many of these folks that were referenced in Hebrews chapter 11. We have a good understanding
If we've been around church, we've been around the Bible for any length of time
We have a good understanding of many of these characters that are referenced how much greater
understanding these Jewish believers would have had of these people that are referenced in Hebrews chapter number 11 and
We find that here as faith is explained. He says now faith is notice this word
substance faith is the
Substance of things hoped for the interesting aspect as we look at this word
Substances it is that which rest upon fact
That which rest upon fact, it's not a theory. It's not a hypothesis
when we think about
Substance he says now faith is the substance of things hoped for we would gather from that
Descriptive term substance that it results in us having a level of confidence and assurance
It is that which provides for us as the people of God that firm
foundation and he says that faith is
Substance it is the substance of things hoped for but then he uses this term
He says it is the evidence of things not seen
So we see two descriptive terms here substance of things hoped for
Evidence of things not seen that word evidence. It's interesting. It is a word
that would be used and
That which is accepted for conviction
Now we understand we have in our minds even we think about that
Word evidence and thinking about that which would be accepted for conviction
We'd have our minds maybe in a court of law and understanding charges that have been brought against
Somebody and as those charges are brought against an individual there has to be evidence in order to have a conviction
If there's no evidence if the evidence is not there if it's not provided
It's not likely that you're going to get the conviction
And so we find that he says that it is the substance of things hope for that which rest upon facts
It is not a theory. It's not a hypothesis. It results in us as the people of God having confidence and assurance
It's that firm foundation, but it's also that evidence
That proof if you will
Now you understand this morning
that every day
We do certain things by faith. In
In fact, I would argue this morning that every person that walks upon the face of this earth
exercises faith
When they get into an automobile they exercise faith and those particular
Elements that were used to construct that vehicle when they walk into a building when you cross a bridge
You're exercising faith and the person that designed that
That bridge the architects that designed it the the people that have not only
built the bridge, but the materials in which the bridge is made of
Now we don't think about it that way though, right?
Most of us we just go ahead and drive right over the bridge. I think about ladders
So it's a good illustration of faith. You've got to get on the ladder
I remember Ed and Jackie over in the fellowship hall and Ed might remember this a number of years ago
It was right after we had gotten here and it's probably about eight and a half years ago
and we were doing a project here and Ed brought a ladder and
The ladder that Ed brought must have been his father's it was in old old shape
I mean it was not looking so good and I weigh a few more pounds than Ed does and Ed says, oh, it's good
I said, how about I hold it for you? Amen
I didn't have any faith in that ladder
That it was going to support me that I could climb up on it. And so I
Acknowledged the situation I looked at and I said no, I'm not going to step on that ladder. I didn't trust it
I didn't have faith that I could stand upon that ladder and we think about faith
It's action as we go throughout the book of the 11th chapter the book of Hebrews over the next several weeks
We'll find that faith results in action, but we see that it's this substance. It's this evidence
I've often said throughout the years that a simple definition of faith is this
Taking God at his word
The question really comes down to this. Do we believe what God said?
Many years ago when I worked in the corporate world and I was dealing with a very high-profile project and I worked in the
The procurement department we had a very very important project that was coming up
Customers were coming in to take delivery of a 50 million dollar aircraft and they had the potential of purchasing more aircraft
it was a very very serious situation and we were missing some parts and
It was absolutely critical that those parts arrived tomorrow
And I remember the particular vendor that I was working with on that project was a vendor out in
California and I was contacting them regularly and I was trying to get that tracking number so that I could have some type of
Just proof if you will that it was actually shipping. It was going to arrive
And I remember as I spoke with that man late in the day
Still no tracking number available. He says you just have to have faith man
And I said, I don't have any faith in you
All right, and I want I want to have a tracking number. I want to have some see but God's given us this book
We're taking God at his word
We're saying I'm believing what God says see when that individual finally provided me with a tracking number number
I had a certain level of confidence that we were going to get the items that we needed
Why because I had something other than his word. I wasn't trusting his word
See, we have the God of the universe who's given us this precious book
That's been preserved for us that people throughout the ages
Have fought to defend and to deliver to a next generation and it is the source of our faith
and this morning
We think about faith we say
That we take God at his word
It's the substance of things hope for the evidence of things not seen I have absolute assurance
That God will do what he said. He will do
He always has he always will amen
This morning. We're familiar with the bumper sticker. That was very popular years ago
I've not seen it often in recent years where the bumper sticker would say God said it
I believe it that settles it. I've often said that it doesn't matter if you believe it or not if
God said it that settles it. Amen
You believing it or not believing it will not change the truth. We can't change truth truth is truth
We find that the Apostle Paul said this in 2nd Timothy chapter number 1 in verse number 12
He says for the witch cause I also saw suffer these things nevertheless
I am NOT ashamed for I know whom I have believed and am
Persuaded that he is able to keep that which I have committed unto him
Against that day. I want you to think about that word persuaded keep in your mind just for a moment
Maybe write it in your notes. I want you to
Reference back to that in just a moment. Paul says this in Acts 27 in verse number 25
And it's a great declaration
in the midst of a terrible storm and all sorts of
Danger that is imminent and they were not sure that they would survive in the angel
The Lord came and spoke to to Paul and Paul says this in Acts 27 in verse number 25
He says wherefore sirs be of good cheer for I
Believe God. What does he say that it shall be?
Even as it was told me
Notice that word believe he used the word persuaded in 2nd Timothy 1 in verse number 12
He uses the word believe in Acts 27 in verse number 25
It's interesting that Hebrews 1039 when he says that we are of them that believe is that same word that we saw?
That we're referencing here. But the thing that's interesting is that the word persuaded and the word believe they are not the same word
Obviously, they are synonymous one with another but the interesting thing is you dig in and begin to study is that both of those words?
Have the same root word and it is the root word that is translated believe in Hebrews 1039
But is the root word that is translated almost 240 times in our English New Testament faith
What is faith it's being persuaded
What is faith it's believing
Think about Paul in that situation in Acts 27 in verse number 25 if you're familiar with go with what's going on in Acts 27
Paul had actually told them not to set sail
But yet they went and they sailed anyway, they get in the midst of your Euclidean and all that storm
They did not see stars for days. And I mean they were fearful for their lives and these are professionals
We
Find that the Lord allowed for the Angel of God to come and to speak to Paul and he says in the midst
there's 276 people on that ship and
He says I believe God. Can you see the confidence of Paul?
Standing up. I mean in the midst of all of that turmoil in the midst of that storm
It's raging and the people they're they're concerned for their lives and he stands up with
Confidence in faith
believing
Why because God said it it's gonna be as he said
I believe God a word that we often use that would be helpful for us to understand what this
Explanation of faith is that of trust?
Trusting God I
Believe this this morning that each of us could say similar to what the disciples said in Luke 17
increase our faith
If you want your faith to be increased you must get into the Word of God
Not only must you get into the Word of God, but you must exercise faith
many have likened faith to a muscle and
As you exercise faith and you see God do what only God can do and you prove him you take him at his word
And you see God what man how that increases your faith
you think about the disciples and as they
Journeyed along the the road with the Lord Jesus Christ and and you find that many times they saw great miracles
But then they face some type of difficulty and he says how is it that you do not understand?
How is it that you do not remember? What were all of those things? They were faith builders
Jesus was demonstrating his power and he was showing them what he was able to do and in our lives this morning
God has demonstrated his power and he's allowed us to see some wonderful things that would cause our faith
to be increased
We see the
Fact that faith is explained notice number two faith is exercised
We look at these next two verses. I want you to notice in verse number two
It really is a summary verse. It says for by it the elders
Obtained a good report
For by it by what by faith
We understand that verse number six says but without faith
it is impossible to please Him.
For he that cometh to God
must believe that He is,
and that He is a rewarder of them
that diligently seek Him."
Those who have gone before us,
those that are referenced in Hebrews 11,
and obviously many more
as you get down to the end,
you find that he begins to just
very broadly describe some folks
that have gone before us.
Some are mentioned by name,
but then some are just kind of referenced
as to some of the events that took place
that transpired in their lifetime.
And he says, those that have gone before us,
by it, thy faith, the elders,
those that have gone before us,
look what it says.
They obtained a good report.
Their testimony of faith.
I believe this morning that we could say
appropriately from what we understand
in Hebrews 11,
that they pleased the Lord
and they received His approval.
That's the idea of obtaining a good report
is to have the approval of.
And we see here that these
that have gone before us, why?
Because they live by it, by faith.
See, God has designed it so
that His people are to live by faith.
Not by sight.
Many times, we prefer to live by sight.
God, just show me how you're going to do it
and then I'll jump in.
God says, I want you to believe Me.
I want you to believe that I'll do it.
And see, when we think about faith,
we must understand that as I mentioned
in the first point this morning,
what faith is,
that the object of our faith
is of great importance.
The object of our faith is the Lord Jesus Christ.
God Himself. The Word of God.
And because He is the object of our faith,
and it's not that blind faith
that we're just kind of taking a step
and just blindly... no, no.
We're trusting what God has said.
That God will not fail us.
That God will do what He said He will do.
That He's able to do
exceeding abundantly above all
that we ask or think.
And we find here that these
that will be mentioned later
throughout Hebrews 11,
that these, they exercise faith
and because of their exercising of faith,
they receive the approval of God,
they please the Lord.
This morning,
I don't think any of us would say,
well, I'm not interested in pleasing God.
That would be a really foolish thing to say,
don't you agree?
I believe this morning
that if we were to one by one go around,
if we had some means of speaking
to each individual that's watching
via live stream this morning,
and we were able to contact each one individually
and say, do you want to please God?
I think that we'd have a very high percentage,
if not 100%, I mean way up there
that would answer, yes, I want to please God.
Live by faith.
Because without it, it's impossible to please Him.
And the elders that are referenced here
in verse number two
that will have the opportunity to see a sampling
that will follow throughout the remainder of the chapter,
they lived by faith and thus pleased God
and obtained His approval.
I want you to notice in verse number three,
a very interesting verse.
The Bible says, through faith,
what's that next word?
We.
Through faith, we understand
that the worlds were framed by the Word of God
so that things which are seen
were not made of things which do appear.
The reason why I believe that this is of interest
is because the majority of the text of Scripture
that is before us
references individuals by name who exercise faith.
By faith, right?
We go through it and we can see
that by faith, Abel, in verse four.
By faith, Enoch, in verse number five.
By faith, Noah.
By faith, Abraham.
By faith, Sarah.
I mean, you go through the passage
and you see all of these individuals,
but in verse number three,
it says, through faith, we understand.
There was an understanding that the writer of Hebrews
is expressing to the recipients
and including the recipients in this very truth
that is before us in verse number three.
There was an understanding that they had
and the understanding that they had
was with regard to creation.
Now, I understand that verse number three,
there are some that will say,
well, the word worlds doesn't really mean
universe or creation.
It means ages or eternity.
The fact of the matter is that
the word that is used there, worlds,
can and does, in some references,
refer to ages and eternity,
but it also refers to the universe.
And how is it that we determine what it is
that is being referenced is through the context
of what we find in the Word of God.
We interpret Scripture contextually.
And as we understand the proper interpretation of Scripture,
I believe this morning that it is abundantly clear
that what is in view here is that of creation.
Notice what he says.
Through faith, we, again, using that plural sense
of including the recipients of the book of Hebrews,
we understand something.
What is it that we understand?
We understand the worlds were framed by the Word of God.
The worlds were framed by the Word of God.
You understand this morning,
if you were to read Genesis chapter number one,
that you'll see this phrase repeated,
God said, God said, and it was done.
God said, and it was done.
And you see it repeated through Genesis chapter number one,
and you have the understanding that as you read
through Genesis chapter number one
that God has spoken all things into existence.
It's interesting if you turn over to the book of Psalms
and look, if you will, very quickly at Psalm 32
and notice what is said here, excuse me, Psalm 33.
And I want you to notice what the Lord gives us here
in this particular passage of Scripture
with regard to the creation.
Again, I mentioned already that in Genesis chapter number one
and when we studied this weeks, months ago,
through our study of the book of Genesis,
I referenced, if you were here as part of that study,
I encourage you to underline where it says,
God said, and then underline where it says, it was so.
Because God said, and it happened.
Here in Psalm 33, notice what the Bible says
in verse number one, rejoice in the Lord,
O you righteous, for praise is comely for the upright.
He's speaking about praising and worshiping the Lord
and how appropriate that is.
Skip down and look at verse number five.
He loveth righteousness and judgment.
The earth is full of the goodness of the Lord.
By the word of the Lord were the heavens made.
And all the host of them, by the breath of his mouth,
he gathereth the waters of the sea together as in heap.
He layeth up the depth in storehouses.
Let all the earth fear the Lord.
Let all the inhabitants of the world stand in awe of him.
Notice verse number nine, for he spake and it was done.
He commanded and it stood fast.
Isn't that awesome?
That's our God.
He is the Creator.
We understand this morning that the subject matter
of creation is under great attack.
We understand this morning that our school systems
have introduced for generations now other theories
with regard to the origin of mankind
and the origin of the universe.
I read a study not long ago where they changed
the timing of the age of the earth
and they had discrepancies between the two groups
of people that were acknowledging the ages
and the different things that they did
in order to determine and they were different
by billions of years and I'm like,
man, we're only talking about thousands of years
that it even existed, amen?
But the reality is that what we have to understand
is that even in their understanding,
even in what they would propagate of evolution
or whatever it is that they would begin to teach,
that they are also exercising some level of faith in that.
They're exercising faith.
I'd much rather exercise faith than the one that was there
that told us what he did, amen?
He said, here's how it happened, here's what I did.
I said and it was so.
That's the power of God.
See, here's the thing that we must understand
that when a professor, a school teacher,
no matter what year of schooling they're teaching,
no matter where they find themselves,
those that would profess to be scientists,
when they begin to teach on the subject matter
of creation or evolution,
they become a philosopher more than a professor
and they're really beginning to try to give
their perspective, their ideologies and all of that
and you understand in Romans chapter number one
that the whole of the matter
is that they do not want to acknowledge that there's a God.
Because if you acknowledge there's an existence of God,
then you become accountable to God.
So what do we do?
What do they do?
Not what do we do, what do they do?
They want to remove God.
Because if they can remove God,
then they are not accountable.
You're accountable.
Can I tell you this morning?
They can try to remove God
until the stars fall
or whatever expression you want to use.
You're never going to do it.
And you still are accountable.
Amen?
I told someone recently
as I referenced the truth
in Philippians 3
where the Word of God says
that every tongue shall confess.
Right? Every knee is going to bow.
Every tongue is going to confess
that Jesus is Lord to the glory of God.
And I said to the individual,
it's not a matter of if.
It will happen.
It's a matter of when.
And when makes all the difference.
This side of death,
you confess that Jesus is Lord
and your eternal destiny will be heaven.
You acknowledge that Jesus is the Son of God.
That He is the only Savior.
That He bled and died to pay for your sin
because you could not pay for it yourself.
And you acknowledge that He died,
He was buried, He rose in victory.
And you exercise faith in that truth
that He's given to us
and you're born again.
You're regenerated.
Heaven is your home
based upon the authority of the Word of God.
Someone said to me recently,
well, that's up to God.
No, it's not up to God.
What they meant was that God
just arbitrarily chooses.
No, no, God's given to us
the truth of His Word
with regard to salvation.
And He said,
for whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord
shall be saved.
He's not willing that any should perish,
but that all should come to repentance.
No one can really know
is what the person said.
And I said, well, that's interesting
because the Apostle Paul often said
how that he had a desire to go
to be with his Savior.
You can look in Philippians 1.
You can look as he's speaking to the church in Corinth
in 2 Corinthians where he says
to be absent from the body
is to be present with the Lord.
He says to the believers in Philippi,
I am in a straight betwixt two,
having a desire to depart to be with Christ,
which is far better.
For I am now ready to be offered.
The time of my departure is at hand.
In 2 Timothy 4.
Why would a man say that
if he did not have confidence
in what God said?
The lost man is fearful to die.
But Hebrews, as we've studied early on
in this book,
we find that the book of Hebrews
in the second chapter tells us
that because Jesus destroyed
and what He did on the cross of Calvary
in destroying the works of the enemy,
that we find that He delivered us
from the fear of death.
What a joy.
We think about this truth
of what we find in Hebrews 11
in verse 3 with regard to creation.
It's under attack.
And we see those that would philosophize
and those that would give their ideologies.
And this morning, we understand
that here the writer of Hebrews
is saying to these Jewish believers,
through faith we understand
that the worlds were framed
by the Word of God.
We mentioned that.
We saw that in Genesis 1
in Psalm 33.
He spake and it was done.
What a joy to understand
the power of God's Word.
You understand this morning
that there's evidence of design
everywhere in the universe.
And design demands a designer.
Amen?
Lord willing, we're going to build a parsonage.
I'm pretty confident that they're not
going to come out here
and deliver all the materials
and set some type of TNT
and blow it up and it's going to form a house.
No, there are architects
that have designed the house.
There are particular materials
that need to come.
There are laborers that have skill
in certain areas,
and they're going to come in
and they're going to do the work.
A design demands a designer.
I know that we typically,
most of us today,
we don't have old-time kind of watches
with all of the intricacies
of those that were watchmakers years ago.
Many of us have various types of watches today.
But you think about those old-time watches
and all of the mechanics that were in there,
and you think about the way
in which someone had to design all of that.
It didn't just happen.
You look at the universe.
And here, Hebrews is saying through faith we.
It is faith that helps us
to have this understanding.
Remember, he says that faith
is the substance of things hoped for,
the evidence of things not seen.
And we're taking God at His Word.
We're believing what God says.
We look at the latter part of v. 3.
It says, so that things which are seen
are not made of things which do appear.
What a powerful truth that is given to us here.
Really, many principles of atomic physics
could be discussed from the latter phrase
of v. 3 here in Hebrews 11.
And they're clearly in view
and you begin to understand
the way in which God made everything.
He spoke it into existence.
And at the center of it all is His energy.
He's keeping it all together.
We mentioned as we started studying this book
back in Hebrews 1,
and we began to understand
how through not only the creation,
but through His power,
how He holds all things together.
It is His power.
What a joy.
I want to take a journey
through the Scriptures this morning
and help us understand this phrase
through faith we understand.
And again, I believe that the Jewish believers
that are being written to here
are understanding the truth of creation
and thus the word is used through faith.
We understand this.
But I want you to just go with me
throughout the Scriptures.
Go all the way back, if you will,
to the book of Exodus 20.
Now we understand,
I don't think we need to go there
and understand that Adam understood creation.
Amen?
He was created by God.
He walked in the garden.
I mean, we understand that Noah, no doubt,
had an understanding of creation.
And we look at those things
and we understand those things
in the book of Genesis.
Look at Exodus 20, if you will.
And I want to share with you
that Moses understood the truth of creation.
He understood that God created.
In Exodus 20, in verse 11,
right in the midst of the passage
dealing with the Ten Commandments,
the Bible says,
for in six days the Lord made heaven and earth,
the sea, and all that in them is,
and rested the seventh day.
Wherefore, the Lord blessed the Sabbath day
and hallowed it.
See, we look here and we see
that Moses had an understanding of creation.
He had an understanding
that God created all things in six days,
and then he rested on the seventh day.
And obviously, the model that is given here
in the previous verse of Scripture
is with regard to the Sabbath.
And God used that creation week
as a model for how the nation of Israel
would understand their week
and the Sabbath and so on and so forth.
But we see here that Moses understood creation.
Turn to the book of Job, if you will,
in Job chapter number 38.
And we're gonna go backwards here.
We're gonna go forward
and then we're gonna go backwards.
I apologize for that,
but go over to Job 38.
And let me show you here,
Job 38.
We understand that as we go through the book of Job
and begin to study,
and the first couple of chapters
dealing with all the hardship that Job endured,
and then of course his miserable comforters,
also known as friends,
come to discuss many things with him.
And then God speaks,
and He speaks here in chapter 38.
The Bible says this,
then the Lord answered Job out of the whirlwind
and said,
Who is this that darkeneth counsel
by words without knowledge?
Gird up now thy loins like a man,
for I will demand of thee
and answer thou me.
Where wast thou when I laid the foundations of the earth?
Declare, if thou hast understanding.
What's God revealing to Job?
He's the creator.
Amen?
Job understood.
Job had an understanding of creation.
I think about David.
You don't need to turn there,
but in Psalm 19 and verse number one,
what is David saying?
The heavens declare the glory of God.
The firmament showeth forth his handiwork.
We've been singing our theme song
for the last couple of months
from Psalm 121, verses one and two.
It is not a psalm that is ascribed to David,
but we find it in that psalm.
I will lift up mine eyes into the hills
from whence cometh my help.
My help cometh from the Lord,
which made heaven and earth.
We find that Hezekiah turned back,
if you will, to 2 Kings 19.
We're familiar with the passage of Scripture
and the account of what happens to Judah
during this particular time.
And the Assyrians had already taken captive Israel,
the world power at that time, Assyria,
and all that they're doing
and all the lands and people
that they're conquering.
And they come to Judah,
and Hezekiah is the king of Judah.
Hezekiah was a good king.
They'd experienced revival,
and we find that Hezekiah here
in 2 Kings 19 after Sennacherib
sends Rabshakeh and all that happens
and all that is threatened,
we find that the Bible tells us
that Hezekiah prays.
And I want you to notice what Hezekiah prayed
in 2 Kings 19 and verse 15.
And Hezekiah prayed before the Lord and said,
O Lord God of Israel,
which made heaven and earth,
which dwellest between the cherubims,
thou art the God, even Thou alone,
of all the kingdoms of the earth.
Thou hast made heaven and earth."
Hezekiah understood that God's the Creator.
Look over in the book of Jeremiah, if you will.
Jeremiah is just a little bit after Hezekiah
from a timeline perspective
and all that's taking place.
We now know in Jeremiah 32,
we understand here in Jeremiah
that the Babylonians are now besieging.
They've laid their troops
against the nation of Judah.
And we find that Jeremiah in fact
could look out and he could see
the Babylonians that are gathered together.
And God had told Jeremiah
and Jeremiah had faithfully prophesied
that the Babylonians are going to take you captive.
It's interesting that the king did not believe
and yet the king came back and said,
is there any word from the Lord?
And Jeremiah's like, yeah, the same thing I've been telling you.
Here's what's going to happen.
Jeremiah's told something interesting in Jeremiah 32.
He's told to buy the field.
We don't have time to get into all of it.
It's a fascinating study.
I preached on it several years ago.
But you look at Jeremiah 32
and you see that he's instructed to buy the field,
yet the nation of Judah is getting ready
to be carried into captivity.
And God tells him to buy the field
and we find that he does.
He takes the evidence and he does all of the things
the way that he's supposed to.
And we come to the prayer of Jeremiah.
It says in v. 16,
now when I had delivered the evidence
of the purchase unto Barak the son of Neriah,
I prayed unto the Lord saying,
O Lord God, behold,
Thou hast made the heaven and the earth
by Thy great power and stretched out arm,
and there is nothing too hard for Thee.
Jeremiah understood that God's the Creator.
We're taking a quick sampling here.
We've seen Moses. We've seen Job.
We've seen David. We've seen Hezekiah.
We've now seen Jeremiah.
Turn to the New Testament if you will.
I want to use the example of the Lord Jesus Christ.
Of course, He knows the truth of creation
because He's there. He's the Creator. Amen?
And Matthew 19, notice what He says.
Certainly, there are many references
we could look to.
We're just going to look at this one this morning.
Here in Matthew 19 in verses four through six,
He's dealing with a subject matter
where He's being questioned.
Of course, many times when the religious leaders of the day
would come to question the Lord Jesus Christ,
they weren't really coming to question Him
because they wanted to gain knowledge or understanding.
They were coming to question the Lord Jesus Christ
because they were trying to catch Him
and they were trying to accuse Him.
And they were coming with the wrong motives.
And here in Matthew 19,
we find that Jesus is answering.
I'm going to pick it up right in verse 4.
It says that He answered and said unto them,
Have ye not read that He which made them...
When? At the beginning.
He's the Creator. Right?
He made them at the beginning,
made them male and female,
and said, for this cause shall a man leave father and mother
and shall cleave to his wife,
and they twain shall be one flesh.
Wherefore they say are no more twain,
but one flesh.
Therefore God hath joined together,
let not man put asunder.
Who is He referencing when He's speaking here
in these verses of Scripture?
He's speaking about Adam and Eve, right?
If you go back and you read in Genesis
and you read the account in chapters 1 and 2,
you'll read that exactly what the Lord Jesus Christ
is saying in verse 5.
In fact, in Genesis 2 and verse 24,
it's almost an exact quote.
And He says, have ye not read
that He which made them in the beginning.
And so this not only helps us to see the creation,
but helps us to see that Adam and Eve,
that's the beginning of creation.
There's not these long periods of time.
And He says that He made them in the beginning.
Notice not only this truth,
but turn over to the book of Acts, if you will,
chapter number four,
look at the testimony of the disciples.
We referenced part of this passage
two Wednesday nights ago
and dealt with the subject matter
of that they had been with Jesus.
And after they had gone through the process
of standing before the religious leaders of the day
and Peter boldly proclaiming the truth,
and they were just given instruction
that they're no longer allowed to speak
in the name of the Lord, so on and so forth.
And we find that as Peter and John left,
they were let go according to verse number 23,
that they went to their own company.
And so we see that they're gathered together again.
And I want you to see what they do,
how they respond to the hardship that they had endured,
to the threats that they had received.
We find that in verse number 24,
it says, when they heard that,
they lifted up their voice to God.
They began to pray.
Oh, there's such an importance
that we find throughout the word of God on prayer.
It says that they began to pray with one voice.
It says that lifted up their voice to God with one accord
and said, look at what they said,
Lord, thou art God,
which hast made heaven and earth and the sea
and all that in them is.
The disciples believed in creation.
Paul in Acts 17,
he's speaking to these that were in Athens,
a city that is described as being
wholly given to idolatry.
Paul begins to stand up in the midst of Mars Hill
and begins to preach a message
and he says that he's going to make known
the Lord God Jehovah to them.
See, because they had this altar
that as he passed by,
it had this inscription to the unknown God.
And he says, Him declare I unto you.
And notice the first thing that he says
in Acts 17 and verse number 24,
God that made the world
and all things therein,
seeing that He is Lord of heaven and earth,
dwelleth not in temples made with hands.
Why do we take the time to go through
all of these references this morning?
Because the writer of Hebrews,
as we begin this understanding
of this subject matter of faith,
he not only explains what faith is,
but then he shows how faith is exercised.
He's going to give us a sampling
of a whole host of those that have gone before us
in the next several verses of Scripture
here in Hebrews 11,
and we're going to see how they exercise faith
in what God did.
But he says in verse number 3,
through faith we understand
that the worlds were framed by the Word of God
so that things which are seen
were not made of things which do appear.
As I mentioned as we studied the book of Genesis,
the book of Genesis is foundational.
It's of great importance.
It's under significant attack today.
There are many that would like to attack
the first 11 chapters of the book of Genesis
and really just tear down the idea of creation.
And the problem is that if you can't believe
what God said in the first 11 chapters of Genesis,
how can you believe what God said anywhere else?
And really, that's the motive
of these individuals that are attacking
those 11 chapters is they're seeking
to destroy the foundation
and thus destroy the whole.
That's what they want to do.
But we find that the subject matter of creation
is not simply contained
within the first 11 chapters of the book of Genesis.
The subject matter of creation is found
throughout the whole of Scripture.
And there are many that have gone before us,
and I believe that these Jewish believers
that this book is written to originally,
that they had the same understanding
that God is the Creator.
And we believe that through faith.
This morning, now faith is.
We see it explained.
Understand this morning that it's the substance.
It's that proof.
The evidence.
It's the substance of things hoped for.
The evidence of things not seen.
It gives us a confidence and assurance.
We find that it's by faith that we please God
and we receive His approval,
for by it, verse 2,
the elders obtained a good report.
It's through faith that we believe
that God is the Creator
and that as we find it in the latter part of the verse,
so that things which are seen
were not made of things which do appear,
and how God has created all things
and He's still continuing to sustain
all things to this very day.
As we study the rest of chapter 11,
we're going to see
how people exercised faith.
We see it briefly in two verses.
Kind of a summary of the whole, if you will.
Then we're going to track individuals.
We're going to see how they lived by faith.
This morning,
as we embark our journey on Hebrews chapter 11,
and again, many of us are familiar with the passage,
with this great chapter,
I wonder this morning,
if someone were to write about your life,
if God were to write about your life,
what would He say that you did by faith?
What would He say that you did by faith?
Because as we study through Hebrews chapter 11,
we're going to see
that there's a group of people that believed God.
And I find as I look throughout the Scriptures
and I begin to see
the significance of verse number 3
right at the front of all of Hebrews chapter 11,
how important that it is that we understand through faith
that He is the Creator.
And if we have that faith,
if we understand that,
truth by faith how it will impact and influence the the other areas of our
lives listen if God is the creator of all things and he is no doubt the
disciples went to God in prayer the way they did in Acts chapter 4 no doubt has
a kaya prayed to the Lord God creator in 2nd Kings 19 the way that he did
because he understood these as a creator if God spoke all of these things into
existence this army of the Assyrians is no problem for you God since God created
all things the threat of the Sanhedrin the religious leaders of the day was no
problem for God to deal with this morning we still are numbered with those
that believe that God is the creator and I'm so thankful that he's given us that
truth now faith is and as we go throughout the remainder of chapter 11
will be challenged to see how the people of God exercise faith be challenged in
our own lives how are we exercising faith it boils down to this do we
believe God do we believe God because faith is very simply stated taking God
at his word father we love you we thank you for loving us we thank you for the
privilege of being able to study thy word this morning as we've looked at
these few verses of scripture we've been encouraged to understand how that these
believers have been instructed in previous verses of having that full
assurance of faith of living by faith of being numbered with those that believe
the saving of the soul now faith is the substance of things hope for the
evidence of things not seen we thank you that you've given us your word we thank
you that you are the Lord God Almighty that you're the creator of all things I
pray this morning that even as we've examined these few chapter these few
verses of scripture and these various references throughout your word I pray
that our faith has been increased even this morning through the hearing of thy
word I pray father that you would help us to live by faith as we begin to study
the lives of those that are recorded in Hebrews 11 and were challenged by their
testimony and their exercising of faith God would you help us to live by faith
understanding without faith it's impossible to please you I pray God that
you would move and work as only you can in the hearts of your people during this
time of invitation will thank you for the work that you'll do for it's in
Christ's name we pray would you stand with me heads are bowed eyes are closed
Kimberly's gonna play quietly on the piano as she plays the altar is open you
can make your pew there an altar we want to give the Lord opportunity to work in
our hearts and lives thank him this morning commit that you're gonna believe
him this morning as Kimberly plays the altar is open